# How to use
_Note: assumes Unix terminal (i.e. Linux or MacOS). There are terminal emulators or WSL for Windows, or you can translate the commands into PowerShell, etc._

## One-time setup

### 1. Install

1. Clone this repo. Open a terminal:

```shell
cd some-parent-directory
git clone git@github.com:djsmedes/julia-nbconvert-helper.git
```

2. Install Docker Desktop: [https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/)

### 2. Build Docker image

1. Make sure Docker is actually running. You may need to set up OS permissions to allow it to run in the background.

2. Open a terminal; go to the directory where you cloned this repository, e.g.:

```shell
cd some-parent-directory/julia-nbconvert-helper
```
3. Run the command that builds the image:

_This may take a long time - 15-30+ minutes depending on your connection speed_

```shell
docker build -t texlive-nbconvert .
```

## Each-time actions

### 3. Run a Jupyter notebook through it

1. Make sure Docker is running.

2. Open a terminal; go to the directory where your Jupyter Notebook is, e.g.:

```shell
cd totally-different-directory/my-julia-project
```

3. Run the following command, substituting your actual filename in for `your.ipynb`

```shell
docker run --rm -v "$(pwd):/data" texlive-nbconvert jupyter nbconvert your.ipynb --to pdf --template mono_unicode
```

# Explanation of purpose and function

This repo exists to address a few challenges.

Using Julia in a Jupyter notebook is great, but if you want to convert that notebook into a PDF, there is no good way to do it. Converting to HTML and then converting that to a PDF using a browser's "print to PDF" function results in the code boxes getting cut off. Converting with `jupyter nbconvert` causes the unicode characters in your Julia code, like ≤, to simply disappear. One of the cool features of Julia is the unicode support - I don't want to give that up!

It turns out you just need the interim LaTeX that gets generated by `jupyter nbconvert` to set a monospaced font that actually has unicode support, instead of whatever dumb non-unicode-supporting font they do use. This can be achieved by running:

```shell
jupyter nbconvert your.ipynb --to latex
```

Then manually going into the generated LaTeX file and adding:

```latex
    \setmonofont{DejaVu Sans Mono}
```

Then running that `.tex` file through `xelatex`. 

<insert Billy Mays here>

There's got to be a better way!

Well, in theory there is - you should be able to define a custom template for nbconvert so that you include the monospaced font override every time it generates some LaTeX, including the interim stage on its way to being a PDF.

However, the official documentation for nbconvert (https://nbconvert.readthedocs.io/en/latest/customizing.html) does not explain how to properly do this! They give an example, but it uses standard Jinja2 stuff.

THE LATEX TEMPLATES USE WEIRD NONSTANDARD CHARACTERS.

Check out the file in this repo, mono_unicode.tex.j2, or any of the files in the jupyter/nbconvert repo that end in .tex.j2.

Anyway, the final problem worth solving is not wanting a local LaTeX install, because every time I try to do that, it always seems like it's putting all sorts of crap all over my computer that I don't want. My solution there is to use Docker.

The result is a Dockerfile with supporting template override files which you can use to build a Docker image locally and then run Julia .ipynb files through it to produce PDFs that actually have your Unicode characters.

# Troubleshooting

If you are using LaTeX in markdown cells in your notebook, you may come across issues where some LaTeX command isn't defined, even though VSCode or convert-to-html handled it just fine. This is because these features use MathJAX, while convert-to-PDF functionality uses "proper LaTeX" and these differ in what is provided.

If you need to add stuff to the LaTeX template, the easiest way is to modify the file `mono_unicode.tex.j2` of this repository. I've already added `\argmin` and `\argmax` commands, which are not present by default with the `amsmath` package. **Remember to rebuild** the image as in Step 2 of the One-Time Setup section above.

If you have any problems, feel free to open an issue in GitHub: [https://github.com/djsmedes/julia-nbconvert-helper/issues](https://github.com/djsmedes/julia-nbconvert-helper/issues). I can't guarantee timely or total support, but I will try to help.

## Inspecting the container
The following should open an interactive shell in the container so you can inspect its files:

```shell
docker run -it texlive-nbconvert /bin/bash
```

## LaTeX template file locations
The relevant templates for this project are stored in the container at `/env/share/jupyter/nbconvert/templates/latex`. `base.tex.j2` is the core file where e.g. `\usepackage{amsmath}` happens.
